---
title: "Macro Dicussion"
date: 2022-09-30
layout: post
---
As an economics student, I enjoy making sense of the global macro landscape. I started researching during the worst parts of the COVID-19 pandemic (what else was there to do?). I found the forceful actions taken by the Federal Reserve (Fed) in 2020 particularly striking. COVID-19 was scary in many ways. Outside the public health crisis, we saw vast business foreclosures, layoffs, and supply chain issues, among many other detrimental effects.

Despite the honorable, perhaps excessive, actions taken by the Fed and other central banks, the long-term economic effects of the pandemic will unravel before our eyes over the next decade. Lowering the targeted federal funds rate to 0% to 0.25%, forward guidance, and massive liquidity injections in the form of quantitative easing spurred by the “dash for cash” will have unintended consequences. We even saw the expansion of federal repo programs and the creation of new facilities like FIMA. We saw many of these tools after 2008. For example, the federal reserve lowered interest rates on many swap lines to increase liquidity in foreign areas. Also, consider all the support to local businesses, corporations, individuals, and local and state governments. In short, the incredible speed, depth, and breadth of the response were unprecedented.
  
A direct consequence of these actions included avoiding significant disruptions to the financial system through increased lines of credit. They also gave households and businesses peace of mind during a tumultuous time. The Fed’s balance sheet also expanded at an alarmingly high rate. Going long was sensible. We saw the U.S. money supply growth rate increase fivefold to 25% by the end of 2020, whereas it averaged 5% growth in 2019. Despite what Modern Monetary Theorists might assert, the Fed’s actions question the role of government debt in economic development. It would be shortsighted to limit the role of the Fed to a mere regulator of inflation and employment.
  
Total public debt in the U.S. as a percentage of GDP went from 108% in Q1 2020 to 134% in Q2 2020. Globally, in 2020 debt rose by 30% of GDP to a total level of 263%. Our macro landscape shares some contours with the 1970s, but we have safer policy frameworks. However, the impact of earlier debt waves has been tremendous. There have been about three waves of broad debt accumulation since the 1970s. None of them ended well.
  
We have seen in the past year the checks and deposits from government stimulus chasing goods. The increase in aggregate demand paired with supply problems has led to a rise in price levels. Also, add in the effects of the Russian invasion. Powell was wearing rose-colored glasses at Jackson Hole. Measuring inflation is problematic. However, it is easy to look at the median without understanding the distribution of inflationary expectations, particularly in the right tail. Skewness is important.
  
With the U.S. enjoying the status of controlling the reserve currency, other countries are not as lucky. Emerging markets are particularly sensitive to interest rates as foreign-denominated debt increases debt burdens. Foreign capital inflows and foreign exchange reserves also play a crucial role in these markets in shielding their financial systems. Research from the World Bank explains the rising sovereign bond spreads in many emerging markets and extreme capital outflows a couple of years ago. The actions taken by central banks during COVID-19 temporarily relieved these problems.
  
As markets begin to readjust from inflationary concerns, higher interest rates may spell trouble for some emerging markets. Debt accumulation in such markets (particularly in East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa) has increased throughout the 2010s. Excluding China, much of the debt build-up has not necessarily been domestic. The pandemic has accelerated the bubble at a rate we have never seen before. Real interest rates turned negative. Debt becomes dangerous if it no longer finances economically productive projects (see China). Funds with independent budgetary power created during COVID-19 bypass spending laws, create inefficiencies, and lead to poor risk management. Recent research suggests that the debt composition has shifted towards a riskier profile, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, where the share of the debt denominated in a foreign currency and held by nonresidents has dramatically increased. The low-interest rate environment of the 2020s can shield underlying issues and even exacerbate subsequent debt deleveragings.
  
I do not think there is necessarily a disaster coming in the next few years though some alarming trends exist. It is interesting to consider the effects of COVID-19 on the global economy. Hopefully, debt levels will begin to stabilize through the use of prudential policies, reliance on local currency bonds, and emerging central banks. Debt is a two-way street: austerity, taxation, and restructurings can also provide relief. These measures come with particular tradeoffs that must be carefully considered. In any case, improved transparency concerning spending and borrowing in all countries should be a primary goal.
