---
title: "A New Paradigm"
date: 2023-04-02
layout: post
---
We are approaching an inflection point. 
The problem relates to the rate at which financial conditions are deteriorating in relation to the rate at which inflation is easing. 
Due to the massive amount of quantitative easing from the previous decade, we are beginning to see potential dangers as debts come due.

The first problem in our financial piping is the large outflow from banks to money market funds. 
People realize they can get higher yields elsewhere. 
This dynamic eats into profitability by increasing competition over deposits. 
As a result, credit conditions will most likely tighten. 
The extent of the tightening is, thus, a big question. 
It will be interesting to look at loan issuance and prime rates over the coming months. 
The effects of a possible blowout in credit spreads are likely to affect small and regional bank lending the most. 
These banks also account for a lot of economic activity, which is a significant cause for concern.

We've been getting a selloff in some of the financial equities as investors sniff out potential weaknesses on bank balance sheets. 
Some of those weaknesses may be overblown (e.g., Deutsche Bank). Rapid Fed cuts that seem priced in can alleviate the duration mismatching. 
That said, quick and large cuts may reignite inflation. Looking back to the 1970s, I imagine the Fed is aware of the dangers of entrenched inflation. 
Thus, it is imperative to keep track of the outflow rate from banks to money markets while noting the differentials in how banks produce their profits.

A second and more tricky problem is the $2.5 trillion wall of commercial real estate (CRE) debt set to expire over the next five years. 
These loans were negotiated at low rates. Lending rates are now much higher. 
Small and regional banks are also disproportionately involved in this form of lending. 
Look at loans as percentages of bank reserves and consider the differentials.

The above is a potential headwind for the economy for three main reasons. 
First, refinancing floating-rate loans at higher rates is expensive for borrowers. 
Secondly, bondholders are losing money on fixed-rate income streams due to the money market arbitrage. 
Lastly, office occupancy rates have stabilized in many cities at numbers significantly lower than before the pandemic, which means reduced cash flows for property owners (1).

Looking backward, we've started to see the cracks in CRE (2,3,4). 
As a result of the above, we will most likely see an uptick in delinquency rates. 
Non-performing loans as borrowers begin to default will rise. 
We'll probably get some loan restructurings and more cases of "special servicing" (5). 
Better-capitalized banks may absorb some smaller banks to alleviate pressure. 
As net operating income decreases, we get lower debt service coverage ratios, creating a slippery slope. 
Different geographic regions are also in various positions with respect to these dangers (6). 
That said, repurposing buildings can be helpful. There are obviously many factors that will determine how this plays out. 
It is probably worth looking into how Fed cuts may affect the rates at which these loans get rolled over and the other ways in which the public or private sector can provide relief. 

Aside from small and regional bank exposure to CRE, people are beginning to raise questions regarding shadow banking. 
Janet Yellen delivered a moving speech to the National Association for Business Economics on March 30th (7). 
She highlighted the need for increased regulation and the possible dangers lurking in a post-2008 world. 
The evident price/NAV discrepancies in many open-ended funds pose tail risks in the event of forced liquidations of a relatively illiquid market. 
Considering the U.K. last year, it is worth paying attention to life insurer and pension exposures. 
There is insufficient discussion around the above issues in mainstream media, and I don't understand why.

Our economy is tightly knit. Bad debts in the CRE market can have cascading effects. 
Tightening conditions generally lead to more defaults through decreased demand and less credit availability. 
The percentage of incomes going to service debt increases, which lowers consumer demand by increasing savings rates. 
The above is helpful for the inflation fight but may result in lower corporate profits and higher unemployment. 
The dynamic would further curtail growth as the yield curve will begin to "uninvert" from flows out of the riskiest assets.

On a more positive note, equities have been propped up by the outlook of rate cuts. 
The big question is whether they fail to account for the potential cause of such rate cuts. 
We may move to higher risk premiums as credit tightens from bank competition over deposits and CRE conditions continue to deteriorate. 
A lower rate of disinflation than expected on the Fed's lagged measures might also encourage a longer pause. 
On the other hand, the recency of 2008 will likely accelerate the rate at which Congress and the Fed will act to restore confidence. 
A possible solution (and perhaps a necessary one) would be for the Fed to raise its inflation target, as Rogoff recently suggested (8). 
The magnitude of the situation is less severe than in 2008 since we aren't talking about big bank exposures with insane leverage ratios. 
That said, the dynamics are usually not linear. 

In short, giving up price stability may be necessary to increase financial stability. 
Our government's addiction to debt monetization is real. 
The socioeconomic distributions of gains and losses in a high QE environment is a disturbing problem plaguing our nation. 
The Nixon shock may have played a role in this.

There are many unknowns in the upcoming months regarding the above issues. 
There are also many unknown unknowns. Inflation magically disappearing would be nice. 
Given the current climate, it would not be surprising to see the consolidation of the smaller banks and more shocks. 
I want to look more into Kuroda's actions in the Japanese bond market to understand better how international players factor into the calculus (9). 
In any event, we are on the cusp of a new age in the macroeconomic regime, and banks will have to rework their models regarding deposit base stickiness in the digital age.

References:

1.	https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w30662/w30662.pdf
2.	https://www.recapitalusa.com/brookfield-los-angeles-defaults-could-mark-new-phase-for-us-office-market/
3.	https://www.wionews.com/business-economy/blackstone-defaults-on-a-5625-real-estate-bond-payment-568118
4.	https://www.wsj.com/articles/pimco-is-saddled-with-a-1-7-billion-default-in-office-market-meltdown-79dcb6fc
5.	https://commercialobserver.com/2023/03/blackstone-special-servicing-hughes-center/
6.	https://www.globest.com/2023/03/28/these-5-markets-have-the-most-office-loans-maturing/
7.	https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1376#_ftn4
8.	https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2023/03/prospects-of-avoiding-recession-fading/
9.	https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-03-30/boj-s-ueda-could-shake-global-financial-markets-by-changing-kuroda-policy

